---
title: 'Recording screencasts: My experiences'
category: Developers life
datePublished: '2019-08-18'
dateCreated: '2019-08-05'
---
<p>So, I've begun recording screencasts about ML.NET and will probably record more about other topics. How did I do it, and can you do the same? </p><p>In this post, I'll talk you through the why, the process and the tools that I use for recording my screencasts. Finally, I'll spend a little bit of time to talk about some of my learnings from this experiment.</p><p>Let's first talk about why I started recording.</p><h2 id="where-the-idea-came-from">Where the idea came from</h2><p>There has been an explosion on twitter with people starting all sorts of streaming and recording. Some have begun recording podcasts. Others are streaming on Twitch.</p><p>I've always wanted to record videos, but never got around to it. I've got several reasons for making videos in addition to writing blogs:</p><ul><li>Some people prefer a video demonstration as they are more visually oriented</li><li>Sometimes a video can provide that little bit of extra clarity</li><li>Also, sometimes it's the other way around: Text provides copy-paste instructions lacking in videos</li></ul><p>Also, I find recording videos a fun challenge, here's why.</p><h2 id="my-process-of-recording-a-screencast">My process of recording a screencast</h2><p>So I set out the record my first screencast. Of course, I took a look at how others were doing it. I found a couple of useful posts on the topic:</p><ul><li><a href="https://shawnhesketh.com/create-screencasts/">https://shawnhesketh.com/create-screencasts/</a></li><li><a href="https://www.techsmith.com/tutorial-camtasia-how-to-make-a-video-tutorial.html">https://www.techsmith.com/tutorial-camtasia-how-to-make-a-video-tutorial.html</a></li></ul><p>From this, I derived my process for recording a screencast, that looks like this:</p><ol><li>First, I create a scenario for my screencast. I think I'll stick to three points maximum that take about 5 minutes to demonstrate.</li><li>After that, I write the script for my screencast. I use a table in word with two columns: Action, Narrative. Writing a script beforehand allows me to record what I should tell you without saying a word too much.</li><li>Next, I record the audio for the screencast. The length of the audio track dictates the minimum duration of the video. I do a step-by-step recording where I record each couple of sentences as a separate clip. This way, I can space them out. Also, I like to keep long pauses between sentences so I can re-record a sentence if needed.</li><li>Then, I record the screen on my computer to capture the necessary visuals. I have a 5K display, which would be horrible to watch, so I downgrade the resolution to its lowest setting in Mac OS. I typically record several fragments that I can mix with PowerPoint slides that I export as JPEG files.</li><li>Finally, I mix the audio recordings with the screen recordings and PowerPoint slides to construct the final screencast. I like to use subtle transitions in the screencast to finish it all up.</li></ol><p>Of course, following this process is no guarantee for a cool video. I also invested a little bit in some recording gear.</p><h2 id="getting-the-right-gear">Getting the right gear</h2><p>You'll need a couple of things to record a screencast. I'm using the following tools to record mine:</p><ul><li><a href="https://www.techsmith.com/video-editor.html">Camtasia by Techsmith</a></li><li><a href="https://www.bluedesigns.com/products/yeti/">Yeti USB Microphone</a></li><li><a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pop_filter">A pop filter</a></li></ul><p>Camtasia is a paid product that is awesome when it comes to creating screencasts. You can record audio and video separately. It also allows you to record just a small area of your screen which can come in handy. The editing features take a little bit of practice, but the learning curve is not too steep.</p><p>Get yourself a good microphone and headphone. It's essential for recording an excellent screencast. Also, I like to record during the evening in the home office. It's quiet and doesn't have too much of an echo to it. You can soundproof your room, but I found that unnecessary. The audio was pretty crisp.</p><p>Finally, invest some money into a pop filter. It helps you filter out loud noises like the letter T and P and normalize them a bit. It makes a world of difference to me. Also, it's good to know that you don't need to spend a lot of money on this. I think you can fashion one from pantyhose and a bit of wire if you're in a pinch. Then again, you have one for around 15 euros. You might as well spend that little bit of money on one.</p><h2 id="some-learnings">Some learnings</h2><p>After recording the screencast I've learned a few things for future screencasts:<br>Some people tend to market themselves at the end of the video by asking viewers to subscribe. I didn't do that, and I'm in doubt if I will do that in the next video because I feel that it sounds the person is nagging. At the same time, I know that it will help get more viewers for future videos. I will have to figure out an excellent way to attract viewers without annoying people.</p><p>The videos are concise. I got a lot of feedback that short videos are helpful and fast. So I'll stick to the 5-minute format for now. Maybe I'll do longer videos for full projects, but that's for a later date.</p><p>All in all, I think it was a good experiment and people liked it. So you can expect more videos in the future. See you next time!</p>
